Day 17 – Docker Volumes (Persistent Data with Named Volumes) – Summary

Containers are ephemeral by nature, meaning data inside them is lost when containers are removed.

Docker volumes solve this problem by providing persistent storage that exists independently of containers.

Types of Data in Docker

Application Data

Packaged inside Docker images

Read-only and consistent across environments

Temporary Data

Stored in the container’s writable layer

Includes logs, cache, temporary files

Deleted when the container is removed

Permanent Data

Must persist beyond container lifecycle

Stored using Docker volumes

What Are Docker Volumes?

Docker volumes are managed storage locations outside the container filesystem.

They allow data to:

Persist after container deletion

Be shared across multiple containers

Be backed up and restored easily

Named Volumes

Named volumes have explicit names, making them easy to manage.

Ideal for:

Databases

Logs

Configuration files

Fully managed by Docker.

Creating a Named Volume
docker volume create my-volume


Creates a persistent volume on the host.

Docker manages the location and lifecycle.

Using a Named Volume with a Container
docker run -v my-volume:/data ubuntu


Mounts my-volume to /data inside the container.

Data written to /data persists even if the container is removed.

If the volume doesn’t exist, Docker creates it automatically.

Sharing a Volume Across Multiple Containers
docker volume create my-volume

docker run --name container1 -v my-volume:/data ubuntu
docker run --name container2 -v my-volume:/data ubuntu


Both containers can read and write to the same data.

Useful for shared storage scenarios.

Listing Docker Volumes
docker volume ls


Displays all volumes with driver and volume name.

Default driver is local.

Key Takeaway

Docker volumes enable safe, persistent, and shareable data storage, making containers suitable for real-world applications.

📊 Day 17 – Docker Volume Commands (For Excel)
Command	Description
docker volume create <name>	Creates a named Docker volume
docker volume ls	Lists all Docker volumes
docker run -v volume:/path image	Mounts volume to container
docker run --name c1 -v volume:/path image	Runs container with named volume
docker ps	Lists running containers
docker ps -a	Lists all containers
docker inspect <container>	Shows container volume details
Excel One-Line Revision Notes

volume = persistent data

named volume = reusable storage

-v = mount volume

data survives container deletion

share data across containers

This is repo-ready, Excel-clean, and core Docker knowledge ✅
Next strong continuation for Day 18:
👉 Bind mounts vs volumes (comparison)
👉 git fetch vs git pull (very important) 🚀