Day 18 – Remote Tracking Branches, Fetch & Pull (Summary)

Remote tracking branches help you monitor the state of branches on a remote repository without immediately changing your local branches.

Examples:

Local branch → main

Remote tracking branch → origin/main

In a synchronized state, both main and origin/main point to the same commit.

Local Branch Ahead of Remote

When you commit locally without pushing:

Local branch moves ahead

Remote tracking branch remains unchanged

git status


Example output:

Your branch is ahead of 'origin/main' by 2 commits.


This means your changes exist only locally and need to be pushed.

Viewing Remote Branches

After cloning, only the default branch is created locally.

Other branches exist only as remote tracking branches.

git branch -r


Shows all branches available on the remote (e.g., origin/paris, origin/tokyo).

Switching to a Remote Branch

Git automatically creates a local branch when switching to an existing remote branch.

git switch paris


Creates a local paris branch and sets it to track origin/paris.

Switching to a non-existent branch results in an error:

git switch london

Understanding git fetch

git fetch downloads updates from the remote repository.

Updates only remote tracking branches.

Does not modify your local branches.

git fetch origin


Ideal when you want to review changes before merging.

Previewing Changes with git fetch --dry-run

Shows what would be fetched without making changes.

git fetch --dry-run


Helps you plan before updating tracking branches.

Understanding git pull

git pull = git fetch + git merge

Fetches updates and immediately merges them into your current branch.

git pull origin main


Convenient, but may cause merge conflicts if local changes exist.

Handling Merge Conflicts After Pull

Identify conflicted files

Resolve conflicts manually

Stage resolved files

Commit the merge

git add <file>
git commit

git fetch vs git pull

git fetch

Safer

Review changes first

Manual merge required

git pull

Faster

Auto-merge

Risk of unexpected conflicts

Key Takeaway

Use git fetch for control and inspection, and git pull for quick synchronization when confident about incoming changes.